---
title: "NASA’s historic Artemis II moon mission is almost ready to launch | Scientific American"
source: https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/nasas-historic-artemis-ii-moon-mission-is-almost-ready-to-launch
date: 2026-01-15
description: "On Friday NASA laid out the time line for Artemis II, humanity’s first crewed mission to the moon in more than 50 years"
word_count: 1550
---

## Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media, as well as to allow video information to be shared for both marketing, analytics and editorial purposes.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.
See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data.
Manage preferences for further information and to change your choices.
Accept all cookies Reject optional cookies
January 15, 2026
4 min read

NASA’s historic _Artemis II_ moon mission is almost ready to launch
On Friday NASA laid out the time line for _Artemis II,_ humanity’s first crewed mission to the moon in more than 50 years
By Lee Billings edited by Claire Cameron
!A photoillustration of a colorful triptych of the same image of a space rocket in pink and yellow, natural colors, and green and blue
NASA’s Space Launch System rocket awaits the arrival of _Artemis II_ crew at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida.
NASA/Joel Kowsky (_photograph_); _Scientific American_(_illustration composite_)
Space Exploration
 _Artemis II_ , humankind’s first crewed lunar mission in more than 50 years, is finally nearing reality.
At a press conference on Friday, NASA officials laid out the time line for what will happen both on the days before the mission lifts off and during _Artemis II_ —and immediately afterward. Astronaut safety is the paramount priority, and the time line for launch could change, said John Honeycutt, _Artemis II_ ’s mission management team chair, at the event.
“I will tell you, we’re going to fly when we’re ready,” Honeycutt said.
“ _Artemis II_ is a test flight. It truly is exploration,” said Jacob Bleacher, chief exploration scientist at NASA’s Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate. “There will be a number of firsts that we will be proving out on this flight. I like to say that during exploration, science is our toolbox for survival.”
The update came a day before one of the first major steps to getting _Artemis II_ off the ground: on Saturday, after years of work, delays and anticipation, engineers at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Fla., will begin rolling out the fully stacked Space Launch System (SLS) rocket and Orion spacecraft. The journey from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Pad 39B will be a slow, stately crawl over roughly four miles that will take up to 12 hours, culminating in easing the mission’s hulking hardware onto the launch pad.
!A photograph of a giant tracked machine for transporting NASA rockets.
NASA’s Crawler-Transporter 2 moves toward the Vehicle Assembly Building at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida on January 9, 2026.
NASA/Ben Smegelsky
Once there, focus will turn to a series of important prelaunch tests. A critical milestone is a “wet dress rehearsal,” during which flight teams will load more than 700,000 gallons of cryogenic propellant and practice the countdown sequence—pushing the spacecraft to its limits without astronauts onboard. During similar preparations for _Artemis II_ ’s uncrewed predecessor, Artemis I, persistent problems with hydrogen leaks ultimately delayed that mission’s launch for months. This time NASA is hoping the process will be much smoother. The earliest date in the mission’s launch window is February 6.
If all goes according to plan, _Artemis II_ will lift off on its historic journey carrying four astronauts—NASA’s Reid Wiseman, Victor Glover, and Christina Koch and Canadian Space Agency astronaut Jeremy Hansen—on a 10-day flight around the moon and back: the Orion spacecraft will follow a free-return trajectory that uses the moon’s gravity to loop the crew around and back toward Earth. Reaching about 4,700 miles beyond the lunar farside, the crew will go the farthest from Earth any humans have ever voyaged, ensuring not only rigorous system checks but also breathtaking views of our home planet—and, of course, the moon.
During the mission, the crew will wear sensors to monitor their health and physiological responses to the deep-space environment beyond the moon. And among the myriad experiments packed into _Artemis II_ ’s science payloads will be AVATAR (A Virtual Astronaut Tissue Analog Response), a system designed to mimic individual astronaut organs. _Artemis II_ will be the first time AVATAR has been tested so far from Earth.
All that will help ensure future astronauts can “survive and thrive” in deep space, Bleacher said. “ _Artemis II_ ’s science is the science of us.”
!The four astronauts of NASA's Artemis II mission pose together during preparations for their mission.
Left to right: _Artemis II_ ’s crew members, NASA astronauts Reid Wiseman, Victor Glover, and Christina Koch and Canadian Space Agency astronaut Jeremy Hansen, pose together during a ground-systems test at Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Pad 39B on September 20, 2023.
NASA/Frank Michaux
The mission’s most breathtaking highlight, however, will probably be the view. The crew will dedicate about a day to observing the moon, especially its farside, which can’t be seen from Earth. As the Orion capsule swoops around our natural satellite, Bleacher said, the moon will appear to the astronauts as about the same size as a basketball held at arm’s length. And depending on the spacecraft’s timing and trajectory, he added, “it’s possible they’ll see parts of the moon that have never been viewed by human eyes.”
The mission is the strongest stress test yet of NASA’s Artemis program to return humans to the moon. _Artemis II_ will demonstrate Orion’s life support, navigation and operational systems in a deep-space environment—the first such test since NASA’s Apollo program ended more than a half-century ago.
“We want to put Orion through its paces,” said _Artemis II_ ’s lead flight director Jeff Radigan. “This is a test flight, and there’s things that are going to be unexpected, you know. I think we’ve prepared for those as much as we can.”
Of particular concern is the Orion capsule’s heat shield; during the uncrewed Artemis I test, the heat shield shed larger and more numerous chunks of ablative material than expected, raising safety concerns for future missions. NASA officials changed the plan for _Artemis II_ ’s atmospheric reentry on its way back to Earth so that its Orion capsule heat shield will experience a shorter, but more intense, period of extreme heating. This tweak, officials say, should help ensure crew safety.
After the nail-biting reentry, _Artemis II_ ’s crew will splash down off the coast of San Diego, Calif. But these astronauts’ mission won’t end there—among the plethora of postflight tests that await them in the days after they return will be an “obstacle course” and simulated space walks in pressurized space suits to test the suits’ functionality after going through a gravity transition. These tests will help gauge a crew’s readiness for lunar surface operations.
That work, said NASA’s landing and recovery director for _Artemis II_ Liliana Villarreal, “prepares us for landing on the moon [with _Artemis III_] and eventually, down the road, going to destinations such as Mars.”
## It’s Time to Stand Up for Science
If you enjoyed this article, I’d like to ask for your support. Scientific American has served as an advocate for science and industry for 180 years, and right now may be the most critical moment in that two-century history.
I’ve been a Scientific American subscriber since I was 12 years old, and it helped shape the way I look at the world. SciAm always educates and delights me, and inspires a sense of awe for our vast, beautiful universe. I hope it does that for you, too.
If you subscribe to Scientific American, you help ensure that our coverage is centered on meaningful research and discovery; that we have the resources to report on the decisions that threaten labs across the U.S.; and that we support both budding and working scientists at a time when the value of science itself too often goes unrecognized.
In return, you get essential news, captivating podcasts, brilliant infographics, can't-miss newsletters, must-watch videos, challenging games, and the science world's best writing and reporting. You can even gift someone a subscription.
There has never been a more important time for us to stand up and show why science matters. I hope you’ll support us in that mission.

Thank you,
David M. Ewalt, Editor in Chief, Scientific American
Subscribe
# Popular Stories

The possible health effects of radiofrequency waves emitted by cell phones has been a subject of debate for decades
Jackie Flynn Mogensen

Stars emit lots of green light, but our eyes don’t let us see them that way
Phil Plait

Florida’s iguanas are an introduced species, and they aren’t used to the chilly temperatures the state is currently experiencing
Meghan Bartels

Neither a square nor prime number, 2026 is still intriguing
Manon Bischoff

On Friday NASA laid out the time line for _Artemis II,_ humanity’s first crewed mission to the moon in more than 50 years
Lee Billings

Mathematical tools from string theory are giving scientists a new way to study the networking of neurons
Lee Billings
Subscribe to _Scientific American_ to learn and share the most exciting discoveries, innovations and ideas shaping our world today.
Subscription PlansGive a Gift Subscription
