---
title: "Spaceflight Now – The leading source for online space news"
source: https://spaceflightnow.com/launch-schedule
date: 2026-01-17
description: ""
word_count: 966
---

January 17, 2026 
Breaking News 
  * [ [ January 16, 2026 ]  NRO, SpaceX launch reconnaissance satellites from Vandenberg  Falcon 9  ](https://spaceflightnow.com/<https:/spaceflightnow.com/2026/01/16/live-coverage-nro-spacex-to-launch-reconnaissance-satellites-from-vandenberg/> "NRO, SpaceX launch reconnaissance satellites from Vandenberg")
  * [ [ January 15, 2026 ]  Crew 11 safely splashes down after shortened mission  Mission Reports  ](https://spaceflightnow.com/<https:/spaceflightnow.com/2026/01/15/crew-11-safely-splashes-down-after-shortened-mission/> "Crew 11 safely splashes down after shortened mission")
  * [ [ January 14, 2026 ]  NASA, SpaceX conduct ‘medical evacuation’ Crew-11 return to Earth  Mission Reports  ](https://spaceflightnow.com/<https:/spaceflightnow.com/2026/01/14/live-coverage-nasa-spacex-prepare-medical-evacuation-crew-11-return-to-earth/> "NASA, SpaceX conduct ‘medical evacuation’ Crew-11 return to Earth")
  * [ [ January 14, 2026 ]  SpaceX breaks pad turnaround record at Cape Canaveral with midday Starlink launch  Falcon 9  ](https://spaceflightnow.com/<https:/spaceflightnow.com/2026/01/14/live-coverage-spacex-to-launch-midweek-starlink-mission-on-falcon-9-rocket-from-cape-canaveral/> "SpaceX breaks pad turnaround record at Cape Canaveral with midday Starlink launch")
  * [ [ January 13, 2026 ]  U.S. Space Force switches rockets for upcoming GPS satellite launch  Falcon 9  ](https://spaceflightnow.com/<https:/spaceflightnow.com/2026/01/13/u-s-space-force-switches-rockets-for-upcoming-gps-satellite-launch/> "U.S. Space Force switches rockets for upcoming GPS satellite launch")

Mission Reports 
Four space station crewmates undocked and plunged back to Earth Thursday, safely splashing down in the Pacific Ocean off the California coast six days after NASA ordered them home early because of a medical issue. [](https://spaceflightnow.com/<https:/spaceflightnow.com/2026/01/15/crew-11-safely-splashes-down-after-shortened-mission/> "Crew 11 safely splashes down after shortened mission")
  * 
###   NRO, SpaceX launch reconnaissance satellites from Vandenberg 
January 16, 2026
The NROL-105 mission is the first of about a dozen missions planned for 2026 that support the NRO’s so-called proliferated architecture satellite constellation. Liftoff from pad 4E at Vandenberg Space Force Base happened at 8:39:51 p.m. PST (11:39:51 p.m. EST / 0439:51 UTC).
  * 
###   SpaceX breaks pad turnaround record at Cape Canaveral with midday Starlink launch 
January 14, 2026
The Starlink 6-98 mission added 29 Starlink V2 Mini Optimized satellites to the low Earth orbit constellation. Liftoff from pad 40 at Cape Canaveral Space Force Station happened at 1:08 p.m. EST (1808 UTC).

  * 
###   NASA, SpaceX conduct ‘medical evacuation’ Crew-11 return to Earth 
January 14, 2026
The three astronauts and cosmonaut are scheduled to undock from the space station at 5:05 p.m. EST (2205 UTC) on Wednesday, Jan. 14, and splashdown off the coast of California at 3:41 a.m. EST (0841 UTC).
  * 
###   ISS gains new commander as Crew-11 prepares midweek departure 
January 13, 2026
NASA astronaut Mike Fincke took over command of the International Space Station on Dec. 7, 2025. He and the rest of the SpaceX Crew-11 mission will undock from the ISS on Jan. 14.
  * 
###   SpaceX launches 29 Starlink satellites on Falcon 9 rocket from Cape Canaveral 
January 12, 2026
The Starlink 6-97 mission was the fifth Falcon 9 rocket launch of 2026, a rate of roughly one flight every 2.5 days. Liftoff from pad 40 at Cape Canaveral Space Force Station happened at 4:08:20 p.m. EST (2108:20 UTC).
  * 
###   India’s PSLV suffers second consecutive launch failure, 16 satellites lost 
January 12, 2026
The anomaly Monday morning local time came less than a year after a previous issue that caused the failure of the PSLV-C61 mission.
  * 
###   SpaceX deploys NASA’s Pandora, other smallsats amid 1st ‘Twilight’ rideshare mission 
January 10, 2026
The flight included 40 deployment events for a variety of payloads, including NASA’s Pandora spacecraft. Liftoff from pad 4E happened at 5:44 a.m. PST (8:44 a.m. EST / 1344 UTC).
  * 
###   L3Harris announces $845 million majority sale of Space Propulsion and Power Systems business 
January 9, 2026
The deal with AE Industrial Partners is expected to close in the second half of 2026. L3Harris will retain full control over the RS-25 engine.
  * 
###   Crew-11 to cut mission short and return to Earth due to medical issue 
January 9, 2026
In keeping with the agency’s strict medical privacy policy, NASA officials have not identified the astronaut in question or provided any details about the nature of the medical issue.
  * 
###   FCC gives SpaceX “green light” to expand Starlink constellation to 15,000 satellites 
January 8, 2026
The Starlink 6-96 mission added another 29 broadband internet satellites to the low Earth orbit constellation. SpaceX launched from Space Launch Complex 40 on Friday, Jan. 9, at 4:41 p.m. EST (2141 UTC).
  * 
###   NASA weighs an earlier end to the Crew-11 mission after a ‘medical situation’ with an ISS crew member postpones first spacewalk of 2026 
January 7, 2026
U.S. spacewalk 94 was slated to have NASA astronauts Mike Fincke and Zena Cardman perform a variety of operations around the orbiting outpost during the roughly 6.5-hour-long event. A new date for the spacewalk hasn’t been announced.
  * 
###   Dept. of the Air Force opens bidding for Space Launch Complex 14 at Vandenberg SFB 
January 6, 2026
The U.S. Space Force aims to attract new launch capabilities for the Western Range to bolster domestic access to space. Responses are due by Feb. 12, 2026.

  * 
 Launch Pad Live – 24/7 views from Cape Canaveral 

#### Stories you might have missed
  * 
 Astronauts, launch teams practice Artemis 2 countdown 
December 21, 2025
  * 
 Space Development Agency awards roughly $3.5 billion to 4 companies for 72 missile tracking and warning satellites 
December 20, 2025
  * 
 Rocket Lab launches 4 novel DiskSat satellites for U.S. Space Force, NASA 
December 18, 2025
  * 
 Senate confirms Jared Isaacman as 15th NASA Administrator 
December 18, 2025
  * 
 SpaceX flies Starlink mission using Falcon 9 booster flying for a 30th time 
December 17, 2025
  * 
 SpaceX launches Wednesday morning Starlink mission from Kennedy Space Center 
December 16, 2025
  * 
 Rocket Lab Electron rocket aborts liftoff at engine ignition 
December 15, 2025
  * 
 ULA Atlas 5 launch puts Amazon’s 180th broadband satellite in low Earth orbit 
December 15, 2025
  * 
 Falcon 9 launch of 29 Starlink satellites from the Kennedy Space Center delayed to Wednesday 
December 14, 2025
  * 
 SpaceX launches 100th Falcon 9 rocket from Florida in 2025 
December 14, 2025

MENU
© 1999-2026 Spaceflight Now Inc 
[](https://spaceflightnow.com/<#>)
Notifications
