---
title: "Fine-Tuning Llama3 with Chat Data — torchtune 0.3 documentation"
source: https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/chat.html
date: unknown
description: ""
word_count: 2062
---

[](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<https:/pytorch.org/?__hstc=255527255.eccecc47c540c1c4e1739ced51512401.1768700466916.1768700466916.1768700466916.1&__hssc=255527255.1.1768700466916&__hsfp=b4dab035b1ad5b25135e0ba930aea383>)
  * Learn 
 Get Started Run PyTorch locally or get started quickly with one of the supported cloud platforms   Tutorials Whats new in PyTorch tutorials   Learn the Basics Familiarize yourself with PyTorch concepts and modules   PyTorch Recipes Bite-size, ready-to-deploy PyTorch code examples   Intro to PyTorch - YouTube Series Master PyTorch basics with our engaging YouTube tutorial series 
  * Ecosystem 
 Tools Learn about the tools and frameworks in the PyTorch Ecosystem   Community Join the PyTorch developer community to contribute, learn, and get your questions answered   Forums A place to discuss PyTorch code, issues, install, research   Developer Resources Find resources and get questions answered   Contributor Awards - 2023 Award winners announced at this year's PyTorch Conference 
  * Edge 
 About PyTorch Edge Build innovative and privacy-aware AI experiences for edge devices   ExecuTorch End-to-end solution for enabling on-device inference capabilities across mobile and edge devices 
  * Docs 
 PyTorch Explore the documentation for comprehensive guidance on how to use PyTorch   PyTorch Domains Read the PyTorch Domains documentation to learn more about domain-specific libraries 
  * Blogs & News 
 PyTorch Blog Catch up on the latest technical news and happenings   Community Blog Stories from the PyTorch ecosystem   Videos Learn about the latest PyTorch tutorials, new, and more   Community Stories Learn how our community solves real, everyday machine learning problems with PyTorch   Events Find events, webinars, and podcasts 
  * About 
 PyTorch Foundation Learn more about the PyTorch Foundation   Governing Board 
  *  Become a Member 
  *  

[](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<#>)
Table of Contents [](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<#>)
  *  Docs  >
  * Fine-Tuning Llama3 with Chat Data
  * 

Shortcuts 
# Fine-Tuning Llama3 with Chat Data[](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<#fine-tuning-llama3-with-chat-data>)
Llama3 Instruct introduced a new prompt template for fine-tuning with chat data. In this tutorial, we’ll cover what you need to know to get you quickly started on preparing your own custom chat dataset for fine-tuning Llama3 Instruct.
You will learn:
  * How the Llama3 Instruct format differs from Llama2
  * All about prompt templates and special tokens
  * How to use your own chat dataset to fine-tune Llama3 Instruct

Prerequisites
  * Be familiar with configuring datasets
  * Know how to download Llama3 Instruct weights

## Template changes from Llama2 to Llama3[](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<#template-changes-from-llama2-to-llama3>)
The Llama2 chat model requires a specific template when prompting the pre-trained model. Since the chat model was pretrained with this prompt template, if you want to run inference on the model, you’ll need to use the same template for optimal performance on chat data. Otherwise, the model will just perform standard text completion, which may or may not align with your intended use case.
From the official Llama2 prompt template guide for the Llama2 chat model, we can see that special tags are added:
```
<s>[INST] <<SYS>>
You are a helpful, respectful, and honest assistant.
<</SYS>>
Hi! I am a human. [/INST] Hello there! Nice to meet you! I'm Meta AI, your friendly AI assistant </s>

```
Copy to clipboard
Llama3 Instruct overhauled the template from Llama2 to better support multiturn conversations. The same text in the Llama3 Instruct format would look like this:
```
<|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>system<|end_header_id|>
You are a helpful, respectful, and honest assistant.<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>
Hi! I am a human.<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>
Hello there! Nice to meet you! I'm Meta AI, your friendly AI assistant<|eot_id|>

```
Copy to clipboard
The tags are entirely different, and they are actually encoded differently than in Llama2. Let’s walk through tokenizing an example with the Llama2 template and the Llama3 template to understand how.
Note
The Llama3 Base model uses a different prompt template than Llama3 Instruct because it has not yet been instruct tuned and the extra special tokens are untrained. If you are running inference on the Llama3 Base model without fine-tuning we recommend the base template for optimal performance. Generally, for instruct and chat data, we recommend using Llama3 Instruct with its prompt template. The rest of this tutorial assumes you are using Llama3 Instruct.
## Tokenizing prompt templates & special tokens[](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<#tokenizing-prompt-templates-special-tokens>)
Let’s say I have a sample of a single user-assistant turn accompanied with a system prompt:
```
sample = [
  {
    "role": "system",
    "content": "You are a helpful, respectful, and honest assistant.",
  },
  {
    "role": "user",
    "content": "Who are the most influential hip-hop artists of all time?",
  },
  {
    "role": "assistant",
    "content": "Here is a list of some of the most influential hip-hop "
    "artists of all time: 2Pac, Rakim, N.W.A., Run-D.M.C., and Nas.",
  },
]

```
Copy to clipboard
Now, let’s format this with the `Llama2ChatTemplate` class and see how it gets tokenized. The Llama2ChatTemplate is an example of a **prompt template** , which simply structures a prompt with flavor text to indicate a certain task.
```
from torchtune.data import Llama2ChatTemplate, Message
messages = [Message.from_dict(msg) for msg in sample]
formatted_messages = Llama2ChatTemplate.format(messages)
print(formatted_messages)
# [
#   Message(
#     role='user',
#     content='[INST] <<SYS>>\nYou are a helpful, respectful, and honest assistant.\n<</SYS>>\n\nWho are the most influential hip-hop artists of all time? [/INST] ',
#     ...,
#   ),
#   Message(
#     role='assistant',
#     content='Here is a list of some of the most influential hip-hop artists of all time: 2Pac, Rakim, N.W.A., Run-D.M.C., and Nas.',
#     ...,
#   ),
# ]

```
Copy to clipboard
There are also special tokens used by Llama2, which are not in the prompt template. If you look at our `Llama2ChatTemplate` class, you’ll notice that we don’t include the `<s>` and `</s>` tokens. These are the beginning-of-sequence (BOS) and end-of-sequence (EOS) tokens that are represented differently in the tokenizer than the rest of the prompt template. Let’s tokenize this example with the `llama2_tokenizer()` used by Llama2 to see why.
```
from torchtune.models.llama2 import llama2_tokenizer
tokenizer = llama2_tokenizer("/tmp/Llama-2-7b-hf/tokenizer.model")
user_message = formatted_messages[0].text_content
tokens = tokenizer.encode(user_message, add_bos=True, add_eos=True)
print(tokens)
# [1, 518, 25580, 29962, 3532, 14816, 29903, 6778, ..., 2]

```
Copy to clipboard
We’ve added the BOS and EOS tokens when encoding our example text. This shows up as IDs 1 and 2. We can verify that these are our BOS and EOS tokens.
```
print(tokenizer._spm_model.spm_model.piece_to_id("<s>"))
# 1
print(tokenizer._spm_model.spm_model.piece_to_id("</s>"))
# 2

```
Copy to clipboard
The BOS and EOS tokens are what we call special tokens, because they have their own reserved token IDs. This means that they will index to their own individual vectors in the model’s learnt embedding table. The rest of the prompt template tags, `[INST]` and `<<SYS>>` are tokenized as normal text and not their own IDs.
```
print(tokenizer.decode(518))
# '['
print(tokenizer.decode(25580))
# 'INST'
print(tokenizer.decode(29962))
# ']'
print(tokenizer.decode([3532, 14816, 29903, 6778]))
# '<<SYS>>'

```
Copy to clipboard
It’s important to note that you should not place the special reserved tokens in your input prompts manually, as it will be treated as normal text and not as a special token.
```
print(tokenizer.encode("<s>", add_bos=False, add_eos=False))
# [529, 29879, 29958]

```
Copy to clipboard
Now let’s take a look at Llama3’s formatting to see how it’s tokenized differently than Llama2.
```
from torchtune.models.llama3 import llama3_tokenizer
tokenizer = llama3_tokenizer("/tmp/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct/original/tokenizer.model")
messages = [Message.from_dict(msg) for msg in sample]
tokens, mask = tokenizer.tokenize_messages(messages)
print(tokenizer.decode(tokens))
# '<|start_header_id|>system<|end_header_id|>\n\nYou are a helpful, respectful,
# and honest assistant.<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>\n\nWho
# are the most influential hip-hop artists of all time?<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>
# assistant<|end_header_id|>\n\nHere is a list of some of the most influential hip-hop
# artists of all time: 2Pac, Rakim, N.W.A., Run-D.M.C., and Nas.<|eot_id|>'

```
Copy to clipboard
Note
We used the `tokenize_messages` API for Llama3, which is different than encode. It simply manages adding all the special tokens in the correct places after encoding the individual messages.
We can see that the tokenizer handled all the formatting without us specifying a prompt template. It turns out that all of the additional tags are special tokens, and we don’t require a separate prompt template. We can verify this by checking if the tags get encoded as their own token IDs.
```
print(tokenizer.special_tokens["<|begin_of_text|>"])
# 128000
print(tokenizer.special_tokens["<|eot_id|>"])
# 128009

```
Copy to clipboard
The best part is - all these special tokens are handled purely by the tokenizer. That means you won’t have to worry about messing up any required prompt templates!
## When should I use a prompt template?[](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<#when-should-i-use-a-prompt-template>)
Whether or not to use a prompt template is governed by what your desired inference behavior is. You should use a prompt template if you are running inference on the base model and it was pre-trained with a prompt template, or you want to prime a fine-tuned model to expect a certain prompt structure on inference for a specific task.
It is not strictly necessary to fine-tune with a prompt template, but generally specific tasks will require specific templates. For example, the `SummarizeTemplate` provides a lightweight structure to prime your fine-tuned model for prompts asking to summarize text. This would wrap around the user message, with the assistant message untouched.
```
f"Summarize this dialogue:\n{dialogue}\n---\nSummary:\n"

```
Copy to clipboard
You can fine-tune Llama2 with this template even though the model was originally pre-trained with the `Llama2ChatTemplate`, as long as this is what the model sees during inference. The model should be robust enough to adapt to a new template.
## Fine-tuning on a custom chat dataset[](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<#fine-tuning-on-a-custom-chat-dataset>)
Let’s test our understanding by trying to fine-tune the Llama3-8B instruct model with a custom chat dataset. We’ll walk through how to set up our data so that it can be tokenized correctly and fed into our model.
Let’s say we have a local dataset saved as a JSON file that contains conversations with an AI model. How can we get something like this into a format Llama3 understands and tokenizes correctly?
```
# data/my_data.json
[
  {
    "dialogue": [
      {
        "from": "human",
        "value": "What is your name?"
      },
      {
        "from": "gpt",
        "value": "I am an AI assistant, I don't have a name."
      },
      {
        "from": "human",
        "value": "Pretend you have a name."
      },
      {
        "from": "gpt",
        "value": "My name is Mark Zuckerberg."
      }
    ]
  },
]

```
Copy to clipboard
Let’s first take a look at the Generic dataset builders and see which fits our use case. Since we have conversational data, `chat_dataset()` seems to be a good fit. For any custom local dataset we always need to specify `source`, `data_files`, and `split` for any dataset builder in torchtune. For `chat_dataset()`, we additionally need to specify `conversation_column` and `conversation_style`. Our data follows the `"sharegpt"` format, so we can specify that here. Altogether, our `chat_dataset()` call should look like so:
```
from torchtune.datasets import chat_dataset
from torchtune.models.llama3 import llama3_tokenizer
tokenizer = llama3_tokenizer("/tmp/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct/original/tokenizer.model")
ds = chat_dataset(
  tokenizer=tokenizer,
  source="json",
  data_files="data/my_data.json",
  split="train",
  conversation_column="dialogue",
  conversation_style="sharegpt",
)

```
Copy to clipboard
```
# In config
tokenizer:
_component_:torchtune.models.llama3.llama3_tokenizer
path:/tmp/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct/original/tokenizer.model
dataset:
_component_:torchtune.datasets.chat_dataset
source:json
data_files:data/my_data.json
split:train
conversation_column:dialogue
conversation_style:sharegpt

```
Copy to clipboard
Note
You can pass in any keyword argument for load_dataset into all our Dataset classes and they will honor them. This is useful for common parameters such as specifying the data split with `split` or configuration with `name`
If you needed to add a prompt template, you would simply pass it into the tokenizer. Since we’re fine-tuning Llama3, the tokenizer will handle all formatting for us and prompt templates are optional. Other models such as Mistral’s `MistralTokenizer`, use a chat template by default (`MistralChatTemplate`) to format all messages according to their recommendations.
Now we’re ready to start fine-tuning! We’ll use the built-in LoRA single device recipe. Use the tune cp command to get a copy of the `8B_lora_single_device.yaml` config and update it with your dataset configuration.
Launch the fine-tune!
```
$tunerunlora_finetune_single_device--configcustom_8B_lora_single_device.yamlepochs=15

```
Copy to clipboard
  * Fine-Tuning Llama3 with Chat Data
    * Template changes from Llama2 to Llama3
    * Tokenizing prompt templates & special tokens
    * When should I use a prompt template?
    * Fine-tuning on a custom chat dataset

## Docs
Access comprehensive developer documentation for PyTorch
View Docs
## Tutorials
Get in-depth tutorials for beginners and advanced developers
View Tutorials
## Resources
Find development resources and get your questions answered
View Resources
To analyze traffic and optimize your experience, we serve cookies on this site. By clicking or navigating, you agree to allow our usage of cookies. As the current maintainers of this site, Facebook’s Cookies Policy applies. Learn more, including about available controls: Cookies Policy.

[](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<https:/pytorch.org/?__hstc=255527255.eccecc47c540c1c4e1739ced51512401.1768700466916.1768700466916.1768700466916.1&__hssc=255527255.1.1768700466916&__hsfp=b4dab035b1ad5b25135e0ba930aea383>) [](https://docs.pytorch.org/torchtune/0.3/tutorials/<#>)
  * Learn
    * Get Started
    * Tutorials
    * Learn the Basics
    * PyTorch Recipes
    * Introduction to PyTorch - YouTube Series
  * Ecosystem
    * Tools
    * Community
    * Forums
    * Developer Resources
    * Contributor Awards - 2023
  * Edge
    * About PyTorch Edge
    * ExecuTorch
  * Docs
    * PyTorch
    * PyTorch Domains
  * Blog & News
    * PyTorch Blog
    * Community Blog
    * Videos
    * Community Stories
    * Events
  * About
    * PyTorch Foundation
    * Governing Board

