---
title: "List of ISRO missions - Wikipedia"
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISRO_missions
date: unknown
description: ""
word_count: 3028
---

Jump to content
 Wikipedia began as an impossible dream. Today, we celebrate 25 years of humanity at its best. Join us 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
_of_SDSC-SHAR,_Sriharikota_02.webp>)Chandrayaan-3 - Launch vehicle lifting off from Sriharikota
This is a list of ISRO missions. ISRO has carried out 133 spacecraft missions, 104 launch missions[[1]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-1>) and planned several missions including the Gaganyaan (crewed/robotic) and Interplanetary mission such as Chandrayaan-4, Lunar Polar Exploration Mission, Venus Orbiter Mission and Mars Lander Mission.[[2]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-2>)
## Completed missions
[edit]
### Human Spaceflight
[edit]
Mission Name  | Start date  | End date | Details   
---|---|---|---  
_**Axiom Mission 4**_ | 25 June 2025  | 15 July 2025  | Ax‑4 represents a milestone for India's Indian Human Spaceflight Programme, integrating with ISRO's Gaganyaan initiative. While Gaganyaan remains India's independent crewed program, Ax‑4 provided the first opportunity for an Indian astronaut—Shubhanshu Shukla—to fly on a commercial mission to the ISS. In his 18-day stay aboard the ISS, Shukla conducted various experiments developed by ISRO and Indian institutions, including studies of cognitive effects of screen use, microbial adaptation, muscle atrophy, and crop resilience in microgravity.[[3]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-3>)[[4]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-4>)[[5]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-5>)  
### Earth
[edit]
See also: List of Earth observation satellites
Mission Name  | Start date  | End date | Details   
---|---|---|---  
**NISAR> "NISAR \(satellite\)")** | 30 July 2025  | TBA | **NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR)** is a joint project between NASA and ISRO to co-develop and launch a dual-frequency synthetic aperture radar satellite that is used for remote sensing. It is notable for being the first dual-band radar imaging satellite.[[6]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-6>)  
### Lunar
[edit]
See also: Exploration of the Moon
Mission Name  | Start date  | End date | Details   
---|---|---|---  
_**Chandrayaan programme**_ | _**Chandrayaan-1**_ | 22 October 2008  | 28 August 2009  | Chandrayaan 1 as India's first lunar probe. It was launched by the Indian Space Research Organisation on 22 October 2008, and was operated until August 2009. The mission included a lunar orbiter and an impactor. The mission was a major boost to India's space program, as India researched and developed its own technology in order to explore the Moon. The vehicle was successfully inserted into lunar orbit on 8 November 2008.[[7]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-7>)[[8]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-8>)  
_**Chandrayaan-2**_ | 22 July 2019  | Orbiter functional; the lander crashed onto Moon's surface due to loss of control (caused by a software glitch) during the final phase of descent.[[9]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-9>) | Chandrayaan-2 was launched from the second launch pad at Satish Dhawan Space Centre on 22 July 2019 at 2:43 PM IST (09:13 UTC) to the Moon by a LVM3 (previously known as GSLV Mk III). The planned or by bit has a perigee of 169.7 km and an apogee of 45475 km. It consists of a lunar orbiter, lander and rover, all developed in India. The main scientific objective is to map the location and abundance of lunar water.   
_**Chandrayaan-3**_ | 14 July 2023  | 10 November 2023 (Orbiter exited lunar sphere of influence)  | Chandrayaan-3 was launched from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre, Sriharikota on 14 July 2023 at 14:35 IST (UTC +5:30) by LVM3 M4. The main scientific objective is to demonstrate end-to-end capability in safe landing and roving on the lunar surface. The Chandrayaan-3 successfully landed on moon on 23 August 2023 at 18:05 IST (UTC +5:30). For technology demonstration experiments, hop experiment on the Vikram Lander was conducted and the Propulsion Module (PM) of Chandrayaan-3 was moved from an orbit around Moon to an orbit around Earth, where it operated until 22 August 2024.[[10]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-10>)[[11]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-:9-11>)  
### Solar
[edit]
Mission Name  | Start date  | End date  | Details   
---|---|---|---  
_**Aditya-L1**_ | 2 September 2023  | TBD |  Aditya-L1 is the first Indian observatory class mission to study the solar corona using a solar coronagraph and also chromosphere using near UV instrument. X-ray spectroscopic instruments will provide flare spectra while the in-situ payload observes the solar events during their passage from Sun to Earth.[[12]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-12>) On 6 January 2024, Aditya-L1 spacecraft, India's first solar mission, has successfully entered its final orbit around the first Sun-Earth Lagrangian point (L1), approximately 1.5 million kilometers from Earth.[[13]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-13>)  
### Interplanetary
[edit]
See also: Exploration of Mars
Mission Name  | Start date  | End date | Details   
---|---|---|---  
_**Mars Orbiter Mission**_ | 5 November 2013  | 2 October 2022  | Mars Orbiter Mission (MOM), also called Mangalyaan, is a spacecraft orbiting Mars since 24 September 2014. It was launched on 5 November 2013 by the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO). It is India's first interplanetary spaceflight mission and ISRO has become the fourth space agency to reach Mars, after the Soviet space program, NASA, and the European Space Agency. India is the first Asian nation to reach Mars orbit, and the first nation in the world to do so in its first attempt.[[14]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-14>)[[15]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-15>)  
### Astronomy
[edit]
Mission Name  | Start date  | End date | Details   
---|---|---|---  
**AstroSat** | 28 September 2015  | Ongoing[[16]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-16>) | **ASTROSAT** is an Indian Astronomy satellite mission launched by ISRO on 28 September 2015, which enabled multi-wavelength observations of the celestial bodies and cosmic sources in X-ray and UV spectral bands simultaneously. The scientific payloads cover the Visible (3500–6000 Å...), UV (1300–op Å...), soft and hard X-ray regimes (0.5–8 keV; 3–80 keV). The uniqueness of ASTROSAT lies in its wide spectral coverage extending over visible, UV, soft and hard X-ray regions.[[17]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-17>)  
**XPoSat** | 1 January 2024  | TBD  | The **X-ray Polarimeter Satellite** (**XPoSat**) is a ISRO space observatory to study polarization> "Polarization \(waves\)") of cosmic X-rays. It was launched on 1 January 2024 on a Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV-C58).[[18]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-18>)[[19]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-19>) XPoSat will study the 50 brightest known sources in the universe, including pulsars, black hole X-ray binaries, active galactic nuclei, and non-thermal supernova remnants.[[20]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-20>)[[21]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-21>)  
## Planned mission's of ISRO
[edit]
Mission name  | Expected launch  | Spacecraft  | Details   
---|---|---|---  
_**Gaganyaan 1**_ | Q4 2025  | Test flight (uncrewed)  | **Gaganyaan** ("Orbital Vehicle") is an Indian crewed orbital spacecraft (jointly made by ISRO and HAL) intended to be the basis of the Indian Human Spaceflight Programme. The spacecraft is being designed to carry three people, and a planned upgraded version will be equipped with rendezvous and docking capability. This will be the first of three flight tests prior to the inaugural of crewed mission.   
_**Gaganyaan-2**_ | 2026  | Test flight (uncrewed)  | Second of the three flight tests prior to the inaugural crewed mission.   
_**Gaganyaan 3**_ | 2026  | Test flight (uncrewed)  | Last of the three flight tests prior to the inaugural crewed mission.   
_**Gaganyaan 4**_ | 2026  | Test flight (crewed)  | First crewed Gaganyaan mission. If successful, India would become the fourth country in the world (after the US, Soviet Union and China) to independently send humans in space.   
_**Chandrayaan-4**_ | 2027[[22]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-sn-20241023-22>) | Lunar lander, sample return  | **Chandrayaan-4** is a planned lunar sample-return mission of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and will be the fourth iteration in its Chandrayaan programme. It consist of four modules namely Transfer module (**TM**), Lander module> "Lander \(spacecraft\)") (**LM**), Ascender module (**AM**) and Reentry Module (**RM**).   
_**Venus Orbiter Mission**_ | 29 March 2028  | Venus orbiter  | The **Venus Orbiter Mission** is a planned orbiter to study the atmosphere of Venus.[[23]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-23>)  
**Lunar Polar Exploration Mission** | 2028–29  | Lunar lander, rover  | Lunar Polar Exploration Mission, known as **Chandrayaan-5** in India, is a proposed mission by JAXA and ISRO to explore the south pole region of the Moon. The mission concept has been formally proposed for funding and planning.[[22]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-sn-20241023-22>)  
_**Bharatiya Antariksh Station**_ | 2028–2035  | Space station | The Bharatiya Antariksh Station (referred in the media as Indian Space Station) is a planned space station to be constructed by India and operated by the (ISRO). The space station would weigh 20 tonnes and maintain an orbit of approximately 400 kilometres above the Earth, where astronauts could stay for 15–20 days.   
**AstroSat-2** | TBD  | Space telescope  | **AstroSat-2** is India's second dedicated multi-wavelength space telescope, proposed by the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) as the successor of the current Astrosat-1 observatory. ISRO launched an 'Announcement of Opportunity in February 2018 requesting proposals from Indian scientists for ideas and the development of instruments for astronomy and astrophysics.   
**Mars Lander Mission** | 2030[[24]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-24>)[[25]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<#cite_note-25>) | Mars Lander, Rover, Helicopter  | _Mars Lander Mission_ also called as _**Mangalyaan 2**_ is India's second interplanetary mission planned for launch to Mars. It will have a lander along with a rover and a helicopter like Ingenuity (NASA)> "Ingenuity \(helicopter\)") and will demonstrate the capability of landing on Mars.   
## Other missions
[edit]
There are also various Indian satellite which contain science related instruments as secondary payloads. The main objective of these satellites are not Space Science. For example, an X-ray payload was flown aboard Aryabhata> "Aryabhata \(satellite\)"), the first Indian satellite. 
The STS-51-B Space Shuttle Challenger mission consisted of Anuradha, an Indian Cosmic Ray Experiment. It consisted of a Barrel shaped recorder consisting of plastic sheets. It detected cosmic rays at the rate of seven a minute for 64 hours and produced 10000 sheets of data. 
In the SROSS-C2, satellite of the Stretched Rohini Satellite Series, a Gamma-ray burst detector was flown. 
## See also
[edit]
  * Indian Space Research Organisation
  * List of Indian satellites
  * List of foreign satellites launched by India
  * List of Satish Dhawan Space Centre launches
  * List of NASA missions
  * List of European Space Agency programmes and missions

## References
[edit]
  1. **^** "List of missions".
  2. **^** "ISRO Upcoming Space Missions and Launches 2023". _Hindustan Times_. 21 December 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2023.
  3. **^** "Ax-4 Research Overview". Axiom Space. Retrieved 4 April 2025.
  4. **^** "Gaganyaan – India's Human Spaceflight Program". ISRO. Retrieved 4 April 2025.
  5. **^** "NASA, ISRO Research Aboard Fourth Private Astronaut Mission to Station". _NASA_. 4 June 2025. Retrieved 6 June 2025.
  6. **^** "NISAR". nasa.com.
  7. **^** "Chandrayaan-1".
  8. **^** "Chandrayaan-1". Archived from the original on 14 November 2007.
  9. **^** "How did Chandrayaan 2 fail? ISRO finally has the answer". _The Week_. 16 November 2019. Archived from the original on 24 August 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023.
  10. **^** "UPDATE: The CH3 PROPULSION MODULE with the SHAPE payload last observed in a high Earth orbit appears to have ceased S-Band radio emissions". _X (Formerly Twitter)_. Retrieved 23 August 2024.
  11. **^** "Returns to home Earth: Chandrayaan-3 Propulsion Module moved from Lunar orbit to Earth's orbit". _www.isro.gov.in_. Retrieved 4 December 2023.
  12. **^** Marar, Anjali (28 April 2021). "ARIES to train next-generation solar scientists ahead of India's Aditya L1 mission". _The Indian Express_. Retrieved 21 August 2021.
  13. **^** "Halo-Orbit Insertion of Aditya-L1 Successfully Accomplished". _www.isro.gov.in_. Retrieved 6 January 2024.
  14. **^** "Mars Orbiter Mission Spacecraft".
  15. **^** "Mars Orbiter Mission".
  16. **^** "Annual Report 2024-25" (PDF). _ISRO_. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 August 2025.
  17. **^** "PSLV Successfully Launches India's Multi Wavelength Space Observatory ASTROSAT". Archived from the original on 30 September 2015.
  18. **^** "Isro's PSLV-C58 XPoSat mission successful; satellite set to study X-ray emissions from black holes and other celestial objects". _The Times of India_. 1 January 2024. ISSN> "ISSN \(identifier\)") 0971-8257. Retrieved 1 January 2024.
  19. **^** "PSLV-C58 XPoSat: India successfully launches satellite to study black holes from Sriharikota". _Hindustan Times_. 1 January 2024. Retrieved 1 January 2024.
  20. **^** "PSLV-C58 XPoSat: Why did ISRO launch X-Ray polarimetre satellite? What's the mission objective?". _Hindustan Times_. 1 January 2024. Retrieved 1 January 2024.
  21. **^** "PSLV-C58 / XPoSat Mission". _www.isro.gov.in_. Retrieved 1 January 2024.
  22. ^ Jump up to: _**a**_ _**b**_ Jones, Andrew (23 October 2024). "India to target moon's south pole with sample return mission". _SpaceNews_. Retrieved 23 October 2024.
  23. **^** Jones, Andrew (18 September 2024). "India approves moon sample return, Venus orbiter, space station module and reusable launcher". _SpaceNews_. Retrieved 18 September 2024.
  24. **^** "ISRO To Launch Mangalyaan-2 Mission In 2030". _ABP Live_. 6 November 2025. Retrieved 6 November 2025.
  25. **^** "ISRO confirms Mangalyaan-2 Mission: India to attempt first Mars landing in 2030". _India TV News_. 6 November 2025. Retrieved 6 November 2025.

## External links
[edit]
  * ISRO – official website
  * ISRO Missions List: Past, Present, and Future

show
  * v
  * t
  * e

 Indian space programme  
---  
  * Department of Space (DoS)

  
Organisations| 
  * ISRO
  * Antrix Corporation
  * Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST)
  * Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS)
  * National Atmospheric Research Laboratory (NARL)
  * NewSpace India Limited (NSIL)
  * Physical Research Laboratory (PRL)
  * Development and Educational Communication Unit (DECU)
  * Integrated Space Cell
  * Defence Space Agency
  * Indian National Space Promotion and Authorisation Centre (IN–SPACe)

|   
Programmes| 
  * Bhaskara> "Bhaskara \(satellite\)")
  * GAGAN
  * GSAT
  * INSAT
  * IRNSS
  * IRS
    * Cartosat
  * RISAT
  * Rohini> "Rohini \(satellite\)")
  * SROSS
  * Chandrayaan
  * Human Spaceflight Programme

  
Satellites| 
  * APPLE
  * Aryabhata> "Aryabhata \(satellite\)")
  * HAMSAT
  * IMS-1
  * Megha-Tropiques
  * NISAR> "NISAR \(satellite\)")
  * SARAL
  * South Asia Satellite
  * Kalpana-1

  
Space observatories| 
  * Astrosat
  * Aditya-L1
  * XPoSat
  * AstroSat-2 (proposed)

  
Lunar andplanetary spacecraft| 
  * Chandrayaan-1
    * Moon Impact Probe
  * Chandrayaan-2
    * _Vikram_ lander
    * _Pragyan_ rover> "Pragyan \(Chandrayaan-2\)")
  * Chandrayaan-3
    * _Vikram_ lander
    * _Pragyan_ rover> "Pragyan \(Chandrayaan-3\)")
  * Chandrayaan-4 (upcoming)
  * Lunar Polar Exploration Mission (upcoming)
  * Mars Orbiter Mission
  * Mars Lander Mission (upcoming)
  * Venus Orbiter Mission (upcoming)

  
Human spaceflight| 
  * Indian Human Spaceflight Programme
    * SRE-1
    * _SRE-II_
  * _Gaganyaan_
    * CARE
  * Bharatiya Antariksh Station (upcoming)

  
Launch vehicles| | Active| 
  * Orbital 
    * PSLV
      * Launches
    * GSLV
      * Launches
    * LVM3
      * Launches
    * SSLV
      * Launches
  * Suborbital 
    * Rohini> "Rohini \(rocket family\)")
    * ATV

  
---|---  
In development| 
  * RLV
  * NGLV

  
Retired| 
  * SLV
  * ASLV

  
Engines| | Active| 
  * CE-7.5
  * CE-20
  * Vikas> "Vikas \(rocket engine\)")

  
---|---  
In development| 
  * SE-2000

  
Spaceports| 
  * Satish Dhawan Space Centre
  * Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station
  * SSLV Launch Complex
    * Under development

  
Research facilities| 
  * Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre
  * U. R. Rao Satellite Centre
  * Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre
  * ISRO Propulsion Complex
  * Space Applications Centre
  * ISRO Inertial Systems Unit
  * Laboratory for Electro-Optics Systems
  * Human Space Flight Centre
  * Development and Educational Communication Unit

  
Communications| 
  * Indian Deep Space Network
  * Indian Space Science Data Centre
  * ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network
  * Master Control Facility> "Master Control Facility \(ISRO\)")
  * National Remote Sensing Centre

  
Legislation and policy| 
  * Space Activities Bill

  
Private companies| 
  * AgniKul Cosmos
  * Skyroot Aerospace
  * Bellatrix Aerospace
  * Satellize
  * Dhruva Space
  * Pixxel
  * TeamIndus

  
Related| 
  * National Space Day
  * SAGA-220 (supercomputer)
  * Statio Shiv Shakti
  * RESPOND

  
  * List of Indian satellites
  * List of Satish Dhawan Space Centre launches
  * List of ISRO missions
  * List of ISRO chairpersons

  
show
  * v
  * t
  * e

Indian spacecraft  
---  
  * List of Indian satellites
  * List of Satish Dhawan Space Centre launches
  * List of ISRO missions

  
Satellites| | Communication| 
  * GSAT
    * 1
    * 2
    * 3
    * 4
    * 5P
    * 6
    * 6A
    * 7
    * 7A
    * 7R
    * 8
    * 9
    * 10
    * 11
    * 12
    * 12R
    * 14
    * 15
    * 16
    * 17
    * 18
    * 19
    * 20
    * 24
    * 29
    * 30
    * 31
  * HAMSAT
  * INSAT
    * 1A
    * 1B
    * 1C
    * 1D
    * 2A
    * 2B
    * 2C
    * 2D
    * 2DT
    * 2E
    * 3A
    * 3B
    * 3C
    * 3D
    * 3DR
    * 3DS
    * 3E
    * 4A
    * 4B
    * 4C
    * 4CR
    * 4E
    * 4F
    * 4G
  * CMS 
    * 01
    * 02
    * 03
  * _Planned: GSAT_
    * _7C_
    * _22")_
    * _23")_
    * _32_

  
---|---  
Earth observation| 
  * Bhaskara> "Bhaskara \(satellite\)")
    * I> "Bhaskara \(satellite\)")
    * II> "Bhaskara \(satellite\)")
  * Cartosat
    * 1
    * 2
    * 2A
    * 2B
    * 2C
    * 2D
    * 2E
    * 2F
    * 3
  * EMISAT
  * EOS 
    * 1
    * 2
    * 4
    * 7
    * 8
    * 9
    * 10
  * HySIS
  * IMS-1
  * IRS
    * 1A
    * 1B
    * 1C
    * 1D
    * 1E
    * P1
    * P2
    * P3
  * Megha-Tropiques
  * Microsat 
    * TD> "Microsat \(ISRO\)")
    * R
  * Oceansat 
    * 1
    * 2
    * 3
  * Resourcesat 
    * 1
    * 2
    * 2A
  * RISAT 
    * 1
    * 2
    * 2B
    * 2BR1
  * Rohini> "Rohini \(satellite\)")
    * RS-D1> "Rohini \(satellite\)")
    * RS-D2> "Rohini \(satellite\)")
  * SARAL
  * SCATSAT-1
  * Technology Experiment Satellite (TESS)
  * GISAT
  * NISAR> "NISAR \(satellite\)")
  * _Planned:Resourcesat-3"), GISAT-1A/EOS-05"), Oceansat-3A")_

  
Experimental| 
  * APPLE
  * Aryabhata> "Aryabhata \(satellite\)")
  * Rohini 
    * RS-1> "Rohini \(satellite\)")
    * Rohini Technology Payload (RTP)> "Rohini \(satellite\)")

  
Navigation| 
  * IRNSS
    * 1A
    * 1B
    * 1C
    * 1D
    * 1E
    * 1F
    * 1G
    * 1I
  * NVS 
    * 01
    * 02
    * _03") (planned) _

  
Student satellites| 
  * ANUSAT
  * StudSat
  * Jugnu> "Jugnu \(satellite\)")
  * SRMSAT
  * YouthSat
  * Swayam
  * SathyabamaSat
  * PISat
  * Pratham> "Pratham \(satellite\)")
  * NIUSAT
  * KALAMSAT-V2")
  * UNITYSat 
    * 1 (JITSat)
    * 2 (GHRCESat)
    *  3 (SriShakthiSat)
  * INSPIRESat-1
  * _StudSat-2 (planned)_

  
  
Space probes| | Scientific| 
  * SROSS
    * A
    * B
    * C
    * C2

  
---|---  
Astronomical| 
  * Astrosat
  * Aditya-L1
  * XPoSat
  * _AstroSat-2 (planned)_

  
Lunar programme| 
  * Chandrayaan-1
    * Moon Impact Probe
  * Chandrayaan-2
    * Vikram
    * Pragyan> "Pragyan \(Chandrayaan-2\)")
  * Chandrayaan-3
    * Vikram
    * Pragyan> "Pragyan \(Chandrayaan-3\)")
  * Lunar Polar Exploration Mission
  * Chandrayaan-4
  * Chandrayaan-5
  * Chandrayaan-6")

  
Interplanetary| 
  * Mars Orbiter Mission
  * _Mars Lander Mission_ (_planned_)
  * _Venus Orbiter Mission_ (_planned_)

  
Humanspaceflight| 
  * Indian Human Spaceflight Programme
    * SRE-1
    * _SRE-II_
    * _SRE-III_
  * _Gaganyaan_
    * CARE
  * Bharatiya Antariksh Station

  
  * Future spacecraft in _italics_.

  
Portal:
  *  Spaceflight

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_ISRO_missions&oldid=1329306835"
Categories: 
  * ISRO
  * Lists of space missions
  * India science and technology-related lists

Hidden categories: 
  * Articles with short description
  * Short description is different from Wikidata
  * Use dmy dates from October 2019
  * Use Indian English from February 2016
  * All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English

Search
List of ISRO missions
             
2 languages  Add topic 
[](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/<https:/en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISRO_missions?action=edit>)
  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
