So, I don't know if our verifications are too restrictive or too lenient at this point, but we at least have a process that's there. So, can we move on to the next step of doing a query which should be able to be completed in just a one iteration of our underlying multi-agent system so it doesn't actually need harness but run it with the harness to see if our system is working properly? To give you some visibility into what I'm talking about, I will first run the query without the harness and then you can evaluate the run to see that it worked well and was able to be handled without any iteration of a harness because we're not going to be using one. So then I'd like you to, after that is done, I'd like you to run it with the harness and see how it works. Hopefully our system does not decompose it into multiple iterations of a harness required because you can see that that is not required when the non-harness run is successful. This should be sort of our bare minimum level test of the harness to see that it operates well in the background. And then if we can get that working, our next process would be to do a larger task that requires clearing the context window through iterating the harness in order to get the massive task completed. And by massive task, that's going to be any task defined that requires more than one iteration.So this is what our set of tasks should look like. I'm now going to run sample multi-agent system run without a harness while you get ready to evaluate it.