---
title: "Google’s breakthrough Willow chip means we'll get useful quantum computers sooner than some people feared | Fortune"
source: https://fortune.com/2024/12/11/google-willow-chip-quantum-computing
date: 2024-12-11
description: "Experts caution that revolutionary quantum computing is still likely years away."
word_count: 1398
---

  * Home
  * Latest
  * Fortune 500
  * Finance
  * Tech
  * Leadership
  * Lifestyle
  * Rankings
  * Multimedia

TechGoogle
# Google’s breakthrough Willow chip means we’ll get useful quantum computers sooner than some people thought
!Marco Quiroz-Gutierrez
By 
Marco Quiroz-Gutierrez
Marco Quiroz-Gutierrez
Reporter
Down Arrow Button Icon
!Marco Quiroz-Gutierrez
By 
Marco Quiroz-Gutierrez
Marco Quiroz-Gutierrez
Reporter
Down Arrow Button Icon
December 11, 2024, 1:18 AM ET
Add us on
!Hartmut Neven, the founder and leader of Google Quantum AI.
Hartmut Neven, the founder and leader of Google Quantum AI.Michael Macor—The San Francisco Chronicle/Getty Images
Google captivated the tech world Monday with Willow, a new quantum chip that outperformed even the world’s best supercomputer on an advanced test, and experts say this week’s revelations are just the start of a new phase in cutting-edge computing.
Recommended Video
The new chip, which wowed even Tesla CEO Elon Musk, can complete in five minutes a complex computation that would take the most powerful supercomputer 10 septillion years—more than the estimated age of the universe, wrote Hartmut Neven, the founder and leader of Google Quantum AI, in a blog post. 
Google researchers were also able to prove for the first time that the chip’s errors did not increase proportionately as the number of qubits, the basic information processing unit in a quantum computer, rises. The qubits in quantum computing are more prone to mistakes than a regular computer because they are highly sensitive to electromagnetic and other forms of interference and can only remain in a quantum state for very brief periods of time.
But in order for a quantum chip’s calculations to make sense, it needs to have a very low error rate, Javad Shabani, a physics professor and director of the Center of Quantum Information Physics at New York University, told _Fortune_.
Google’s breakthrough is “one of the highlights of the recent decade,” he said, and could mean quantum computers are a step closer to being used for more practical purposes.
“Classical” supercomputers, including the Frontier supercomputer, which is commonly recognized as among the most powerful, are used for advanced modeling and simulations. Yet, these supercomputers are more similar to the common laptop than you’d think. They operate on the binary system of 0s and 1s that less powerful computers use, albeit at a much more advanced level. While supercomputers are undoubtedly powerful, they are huge pieces of machinery that use massive amounts of energy for cooling systems.
Quantum chips like Willow operate on a much smaller scale. The qubits that make up these high-powered chips are roughly the size of an atom, and operate via the rules of quantum mechanics. The chips pack a computing punch at a minuscule level and with potentially better energy efficiency than supercomputers, but they’re also limited in their uses.
The test Google ran on Willow is a “benchmark” meant to show the quantum chip’s capability relative to other systems, including the best existing supercomputers. Google in 2019 completed a benchmark test with its earlier Sycamore quantum chip and found at the time that the older chip could complete a calculation in 200 seconds that would take the best supercomputers thousands of years to complete, according to a blog post at the time. 
Google’s Willow chip has around double the qubits used to power its computing than that of the Sycamore chip, and exponentially more computing power than a supercomputer has for some uses. 
Google’s Willow findings show that quantum computers can perform much better than the best available supercomputers in certain cases, an assertion that just a few years ago was more widely doubted. It also possibly shifts the focus of future quantum chip development away from primarily trying to find a way to reduce errors to, instead, trying to increase the number of qubits that make up each chip, according to Rice University physics and astronomy professor and founder of the Rice Quantum Initiative Kaden Hazzard. 
Google’s discovery is groundbreaking, but that doesn’t mean your standard laptop will be replaced by a quantum computer anytime soon, Hazzard told _Fortune_.
“It’s at least a few years away before we reach the kind of capabilities where the quantum computer can be used directly for things that have business applications, for example,” Hazzard said.
Fears about Willow having the capacity to decrypt even the most advanced encryptions used in banking or tech are also overblown, Rice University assistant professor of computer science Tirthak Patel told _Fortune_. Solving such advanced cryptography would require a much more advanced chip than Willow, said Patel, and researchers are already finding ways to create quantum-proof encryptions.
Instead, Willow is a stepping stone toward greater progress in quantum computing. Monday’s findings confirmed it outperforms supercomputers in some cases and will do lots to convince naysayers of the potential quantum computing has to eventually help improve human lives, Patel said.
Still, while it may be several years away, advanced quantum computing could be used to accurately simulate minuscule quantum systems like chemical reactions that could help discover new drugs, or solve quantum mechanical problems to build new types of materials or better catalysts for reactions, said Hazzard.
Possibly sooner, the advanced computing ability of quantum chips could help improve weather predictions or streamline supply-chain efficiency, all while being potentially less energy-intensive than existing supercomputers, Patel said.
Because these types of applications can already run on quantum chips with fewer qubits and without the advanced error reduction that Google has shown is possible, better quantum chips could revolutionize these areas, said Patel. 
“The biggest task right now that most scientists and engineers working in the quantum computing field are concerned with is demonstrating the utility and practicality of quantum computing for different real-world applications,” Patel said. “While this experiment hasn’t done that just yet, it is a major milestone in that step.”
**Join us at the Fortune Workplace Innovation Summit** May 19–20, 2026, in Atlanta. The next era of workplace innovation is here—and the old playbook is being rewritten. At this exclusive, high-energy event, the world’s most innovative leaders will convene to explore how AI, humanity, and strategy converge to redefine, again, the future of work. Register now.
About the Author

By Marco Quiroz-GutierrezReporter
LinkedIn iconTwitter icon
**Role: Reporter** Marco Quiroz-Gutierrez is a reporter for _Fortune_ covering general business news.
See full bioRight Arrow Button Icon
Latest in Tech

CryptoCryptocurrency
Stablecoins will shake up the $900 billion remittance market—setting up a fight between crypto firms and legacy brands like Western Union
By Carlos GarciaJanuary 17, 2026
9 hours ago

InnovationThe Boring Company
Exclusive: Elon Musk’s Boring Co. is studying a tunnel project to Tesla Gigafactory near Reno
By Jessica MathewsJanuary 16, 2026
20 hours ago

AIOpenAI
ChatGPT tests ads as a new era of AI begins
By Sharon GoldmanJanuary 16, 2026
22 hours ago

AITech
Trump says he’ll make tech firms pay for power. They’d love to
By Michelle Ma, Alicia Tang and BloombergJanuary 16, 2026
23 hours ago

AIFilm Industry
A filmmaker deepfaked Sam Altman for his movie about AI. Then things got personal
By Beatrice NolanJanuary 16, 2026
1 day ago

C-SuiteFortune 500 Power Moves
Fortune 500 Power Moves: Which executives gained and lost power this week
By Fortune EditorsJanuary 16, 2026
1 day ago
Most Popular

Economy
America’s $38 trillion national debt is so big the nearly $1 trillion interest payment will be larger than Medicare soon
By Shawn TullyJanuary 15, 2026
2 days ago

Politics
The Nobel Prize committee doesn't want Trump getting one, even as a gift—but they treated Obama very differently
By Nick LichtenbergJanuary 16, 2026
23 hours ago

Europe
Americans have been quietly plundering Greenland for over 100 years, since a Navy officer chipped fragments off the Cape York iron meteorite
By Paul Bierman and The ConversationJanuary 14, 2026
3 days ago

Politics
Anthony Scaramucci thinks Trump's 'hard-left' move to cap credit-card fees is because he's 'texting back and forth with Mayor Mamdani'
By Nick Lichtenberg and Eva RoytburgJanuary 16, 2026
1 day ago

Health
The head of marketing at Slate posted on LinkedIn requesting cleaning services as a benefit at her company. The next day, HR answered her call
By Sydney LakeJanuary 15, 2026
3 days ago

Success
Jensen Huang tells Stanford students their high expectations may make it hard for them to succeed: 'I wish upon you ample doses of pain and suffering'
By Orianna Rosa RoyleJanuary 16, 2026
1 day ago
[](https://fortune.com/2024/12/11/<https:/paid.outbrain.com/network/redir?>)
ad
