Take a look at this chat page. It's running a query. It's displaying the chat panel. It's displaying the activity flow from the terminal. But what I'd like to see add is another collapsible panel that shows File Explorer for the session directory that is being created for this run. So at the same time these other elements are showing, the user can explore the session directory and confirm things like whether a search directory is being created, whether a work products directory is being created, etc. So that we can quickly discern, for example, why in the past run our process failed because we didn't actually create a research directory in the session directory, etc. So the chat tab page should be redesigned to have three equal size panels with those elements all collapsible to the side, such that and that the file explorer should allow for preview in the native style of whatever file is being viewed in the file explorer.

Make sure you use your browser agent capabilities to evaluate the design outcome and correct any issues.

Next, I want you to create a new directory off the root called golden run reference. And here I want you to create documentation of this run and anything relating to it, including the run log, execution, the expected results and paths, etc. And put... This will be the central location for us to refer back to so you have an easier way to evaluate, again, when we are going off the path on something, what a golden path or happy path and a golden run looks like. In other words, so we don't have to go through the whole task stop hallucination trying to figure out why that's happening again. Instead, you'll have lessons learned here that we can build on over time so that we know what a golden run looks like and how we can keep us on that path as we continue to develop. This means you should also explore our project documentation and consolidate all useful information about Golden Run references into this new directory source and delete, if reasonable, from the other locations. So we can now get all our information in the Golden Run reference directory.
