# Source: https://understandingwar.org/research/russia-ukraine/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-december-17-2025/
# Date: 2025-12-23T15:04:00.334062

We use cookies in order to ensure that you can get the best browsing experience possible on the Council website. Certain cookies are used to obtain aggregated statistics about website visits to help us constantly improve the site and better serve your needs. Other cookies are used to boost performance and guarantee security of the website.
With your permission, we will use cookies to produce aggregated, anonymous data about our visitors' browsing and behaviour on our website. We will use this data to improve your experience on our website. 
To get more information about these cookies, how and why we use them and how you can change your settings, check our 
# Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine: Council sanctions 41 vessels of the Russian shadow fleet 
The Council today imposed restrictive measures on an , that are part of Russia’s ‘shadow fleet’ of oil tankers and contribute to Russia’s energy revenues.
These 41 are therefore added to the list of those **subject to a port access ban and ban on provision of a broad range of services** related to maritime transport. This measure is intended to target non-EU tankers that are part of Putin’s shadow fleet circumventing the oil price cap mechanism or support the energy sector of Russia, or vessels that are responsible for transporting military equipment for Russia or involved in the transport of stolen Ukrainian grain and cultural goods from Ukraine.
Today’s decision -which brings and by the EU and its member states on making full use of the international law of the sea framework relating to threats from the 'shadow fleet' and to the protection of critical undersea infrastructure.
The **EU remains ready to step up pressure on Russia and its shadow fleet value chain** , including by adopting further sanctions.
In response to Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine in February 2022, the EU has massively expanded sanctions against Russia with the aim of significantly weakening Russia's economic base, depriving it of critical technologies and markets, and significantly curtailing its ability to wage war.
In its conclusions of 19 December 2024, the European Council reiterated its resolute condemnation of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, which constitutes a manifest violation of the Charter of the United Nations, and reaffirmed the Union’s unwavering commitment to providing continued political, financial, economic, humanitarian, military and diplomatic support to Ukraine and its people.
As long as the illegal actions by the Russian Federation continue to violate fundamental rules of international law, including, in particular, the prohibition on the use of force enshrined in Article 2(4) of the Charter of the United Nations, and of international humanitarian law, it is appropriate to maintain in force all the measures imposed by the EU and to take additional measures, if necessary.
  * [ COUNCIL REGULATION (EU) 2025/2618 of 18 December 2025 amending Regulation (EU) No 833/2014 concerning restrictive measures in view of Russia’s actions destabilising the situation in Ukraine ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2025/2618/oj)
  * [ Consolidated text: Council Regulation (EU) No 833/2014 of 31 July 2014 concerning restrictive measures in view of Russia's actions destabilising the situation in Ukraine (24 October 2025) ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A02014R0833-20251024)
  * [ Consolidated text: Council Decision 2014/512/CFSP of 31 July 2014 concerning restrictive measures in view of Russia's actions destabilising the situation in Ukraine (24 October 2025) ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A02014D0512-20251024)
  * [ Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine: Council sanctions 9 shadow fleet enablers (press release, 15 December 2025) ](https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2025/12/15/russia-s-war-of-aggression-against-ukraine-council-sanctions-9-shadow-fleet-enablers/)
  * [ Declaration of the European Union and its Member States on making full use of the international law of the sea framework relating to threats from the “shadow fleet” and to the protection of critical undersea infrastructure (15 December 2025) ](https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-16829-2025-INIT/en/pdf)


If you are not a journalist, please .
